#!perl -w
# run this document through perl to check its syntax
use Pod::Checker;
podchecker(\*DATA);
__END__

=head1 NAME

P5EEx::Blue::installguide::win32 - P5EE Installation Guide for Win32

=head1 INTRODUCTION

This is the Installation Guide to the
P5EE (Perl 5 Enterprise Environment) for the Microsoft Windows platform.
You can find out more background to the project on the web.

  http://www.officevision.com/pub/p5ee
  http://p5ee.perl.org

You should also consult the general P5EEx::Blue::installguide
before consulting this specialized guide. 

This will describe how to get
up and running (for demonstration or development purposes) from a
plain vanilla Windows system.

These instructions assume that your PC is connected to the
Internet.

=head1 PERL

The official Perl for the Windows platform is available from
ActiveState.

  http://www.activestate.com
  http://www.activestate.com/Products/Download/Get.plex?id=ActivePerl

Registration is required, but it is free.
Follow the download and installation directions and you should end
up with perl installed in the following directories under C:\Perl.

  C:\Perl            # install directory for Perl
  C:\Perl\bin        # programs directory (home of perl.exe)
  C:\Perl\eg         # example code
  C:\Perl\html       # html doc for the installed perl modules
  C:\Perl\lib        # standard perl modules
  C:\Perl\site\lib   # extram perl modules installed at this site

=head1 OTHER PERL MODULES

After you install the base Perl distribution, you need to install
a number of other Perl modules, which would normally be downloaded
from CPAN.  Because you are installing on a Windows platform, however,
you will use ActiveState's Perl Package Manager (included with
ActiveState Perl).  This installs Windows binary versions of many of the
packages which are on CPAN from ActiveState's website.

  http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN/Modules

Not all of the Perl modules you may want (i.e. mod_perl) are available from
ActiveState, so you should know about a second repository for PPM 
files.

  http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppmpackages/
  http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/

To add this repository to the list for the ppm shell utility to
search, do the following.

  C:\> ppm
  PPM> set repository theoryx5 http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/cgi-bin/ppmserver?urn:/PPMServer
  PPM> set save
  PPM> quit
  C:\>

The "set save" command saves the theoryx5 repository to your PPM
configuration file, so that future PPM sessions will search this
repository, as well as ActiveState's, for requested packages.

The following commands are not necessary because these packages
come installed with ActiveState Perl, but they are shown in case
you wish to get the latest versions.

  C:\> ppm
  PPM> install Data-Dumper             # Data::Dumper
  PPM> install Storable                # Storable
  PPM> install MIME-Base64             # MIME::Base64
  PPM> install Compress-Zlib           # Compress::Zlib
  PPM> install SOAP-Lite               # SOAP::Lite
  PPM> quit
  C:\>

The following commands are to install package which are
necessary in order for any of P5EE to run.

  C:\> ppm
  PPM> install TimeDate                # Date::Parse and Date::Format
  PPM> install Class-Data-Inheritable  # Class::Data::Inheritable
  PPM> install Devel-StackTrace        # Devel::StackTrace
  PPM> install Exception-Class         # Exception::Class
  PPM> quit
  C:\>

The following commands are to install packages which are
important to have for debugging, so go ahead and install them too.

  C:\> ppm
  PPM> install Class-MethodMaker       # Class::MethodMaker
  PPM> install Hook-LexWrap            # Hook::LexWrap
  PPM> install IO-stringy              # IO::stringy
  PPM> install Aspect                  # Aspect
  PPM> quit
  C:\>

The following commands are to install packages which used
to be required by earlier versions of P5EE.  They are shown
just in case a dependence on them were restored in the future.

  C:\> ppm
  PPM> install Error                   # Error
  PPM> quit
  C:\>

=cut

=head1 APACHE

=head1 MOD_PERL

The following is derived from

  http://perl.apache.org/win32_binaries.html

After installing Perl and Apache, you can then install mod_perl
via the PPM utility.

  C:\> ppm
  PPM> install mod_perl
  PPM> quit
  C:\>

The mod_perl PPM package also includes the necessary Apache DLL
mod_perl.so; a post-installation script should be run which will offer
to copy this file to your Apache modules directory (eg, C:\Apache\modules).

Note that the mod_perl package available from this site will always use
the latest mod_perl sources compiled against the latest official Apache
release; depending on changes made in Apache, you may or may not be able
to use an earlier Apache binary. However, in the Apache Win32 world it
is particularly a good idea to use the latest version, for bug and
security fixes.

